1. 802.11 Wireless Standards
Managed by the IEEE LAN/MAN committee. Many updates over time. Wi-Fi Alliance handles interoperability testing.

802.11a - October 1999.
Operates 5GHz range. 54.Mbit/s, smaller range than 802.11b.
Not used that much today.

802.11b - October 1999
Also an original standard.
Operates at 2.4GHz range. 11Mbit/s, better range than 802.11a. More frequency conflicts as many other devices used the same frequencies.

802.11g - June 2003
Operates in the 2.4GHz range.
54Mbit/s. Backwards-compatible with 802.11b. Same issues as 802.11b

802.11n - October 2009.
Update to all the previous standards. Operates at 5GHz/2.4GHz and 40MHz width channels.
600Mbit/s when used in 40MHz mode and 4 antennas. Uses MIMO - Multiple-input Multiple Output. Multiple transmit and receive antennas.

802.11ac - Jan 2014
Significant improvements over 802.11n.
Operates exclusively over 5 GHz. Increased channel bonding, larger bandwidth usage. Denser signal modulation, 8 MU-MIMO (Multi-User MIMO) streams
Nearly 7Gbits/s theoretically. (866.7Mbit/s per stream)

-----------------------------------
2. Wireless Network Technologies
Two major frequencies used when using WiFi. 2.4/5GHz

Channels - Grouping of frequencies, numbered of IEEE.

Bandwidth - amount of frequency in use
20, 40, 80, 120MHz blocks

802.11a - 20MHz bandwidth
802.11b - 22MHz bandwidth
802.11g - 20MHz
802.11n - 20 or 40MHz, two contiguous bonded channels. In 2.4GHz, 40MHz channel uses much of the available bandwidth.
802.11ac - 40MHz for 802.11n stations, 80MHz 802.11ac stations needed. 160MHz optional.

2.4GHz - Channel 1, 6, 11.
5GHz - significantly more.

Bluetooth
High speed communication over short distances. PAN that connects a bunch of our mobile devices.

RFID - Radio-frequency identification.
Used everywhere for identification. Uses radio technology. NFC is a form of RFID.

Two IoT standards:
  Zigbee - Open standard 802.15.4 PAN.
    Alternative to WiFi and bluetooth. Longer distances than bluetooth, less power consumption than wifi.
    Mesh network, uses the ISM band 900Mhz and 2.4Ghz frequencies in the US.

  Z-Wave - Proprietary home automation networking. Wireless mesh networking, uses ISM band's 900MHz and 2.4GHz frequencies.

---------------------------------
3. Cellular Network Technologies
Cell phones called that way because we separate land into cells, antenna covers a cell with certain frequencies.

2G Networks
Built for voice communication in mind, not originally designed to send data.
  GSM - Global System for Mobile Communications
  CDMA - Code Division Multiple Access

3G Networks
Introduced in 1998. Upgraded data connectivity over 2G. Significant bandwidth improvements.

4G and LTE - Long Term Evolution
Converged standard, based on GSM and EDGE (Enhanced data rates for GSM Evolution)
Supports DL rates of 150Mbits/s

LTE-A - LTE Advanced
Standard supports download rates of 300Mbit/s

5G
Update to 4G. Rollout in late 2018 and 2019. Worldwide launches in 2020.
Significant performance improvements.

--------------------
4. Network Services
Common servers and services you may find in a business.

Web server
Server that respond to browser requests. Via HTML/HTML5. Web pages stored on the server


File server
Centralized storage of files. Standard system of file managemnet like SMB, AFP, etc.


Print server
Provide printing services for all network devices. May be software, maybe built-in to the printer.
Printing Protocols:
  SMB
  IPP - Internet Printing Protocol
  LPD - Line Printer Daemon


DHCP Server
Server that automatically serves IP addresses to clients. Very common service, available on most home routers. Usually enterprise DHCP is redundant.


DNS Server
Server that converts IP addresses to domain names and vice versa.
Distributed system. Usually managed by the ISP or enterprise IT department.


Proxy server
Intermediate server that mediates connections between client and end point. Proxy handles requests for you instead of client directly interfacing with the endpoint.
Good for security since proxy server can audit traffic.


Mail server
Store incoming mail server. Usually managed by ISP or enterprise IT department. Very important resource.


Authentication server
Login authentication to resources, centralized management of this. Almost always found in enterprise environment, and are redundant.


SIEM
Security Information and Event Management. Consolidate and manage events, logging, and information. Link diverse data types.


Syslog
Standard for message logging. No matter what type of device is sending data, as long as it's following syslog standard it'll work. Logs take up a lot of space so will need a lot of space.
Some drives use WORM technology, once it's written once, data can't be changed after this.


IDS and IPS
Devices that watch for intrusions and exploits being performed over the network. May watch for buffer overflows, XSS attacks, and other vulnerabilities
  Detection - only alarms/alerts if it sees an attack occurring.
  Prevention - Stops before it gets into the network


All-in-one security appliance
Also known as a next-gen firewall, UTM - unified threat management, web security gateway.
Can be a URL filter, malware inspection, firewall, IDS/IPS, and many other security functions in one.


Endpoint management server
Manage all devices from one pane of glass. Perform software installations, driver installations, software updates, and more.
May require you to install an agent.


Legacy and embedded systems
Many systems may be super critical, but super old.


Embedded systems
Purpose-built systems like time card clock, security systems, etc.

--------------
5. IPv4 vs IPv6
IPv4 most popular IP protocol today. IPv6 also slowly appearing.

IPv4
OSI layer 3 address. 32 bits long/4 bytes long. Any number for each octet can be a number from 0 - 255.

IPv6
128-bit address. Separated into 8 different sections, colon delimited. All IPv6 addresses are in hexadecimal, 16 bits per section.
350 undecillion total possible combinations.

Can abbreviate v6 addresses.
  - Can omit leading 0s in a section
  - Full sections of IPv6 can be totally omitted and replaced with ::

DNS becomes very important due to the sheer length of these addresses.
First 64 bits, network prefix, last 64 is host network address.


Every IP address must be unique.
Must also configure the subnet mask, used by local device to determine what subnet it's on.

Default gateway
Router that's on your local subnet. need to configure so device can communicate to internet.


DNS so important, your browser will have slots for two DNS servers to configure. If one DNS server is lost, there's a backup that can be used in the meantime.

-------------------------------
6. Assigning IP Addresses

IPv4 address config used to be all manual.

October 1993, BOOTP was introduced.

1997, DHCP introduced.

DHCP Process
Works on a local subnet. Router must be configured to have a helper address to work with a DHCP server outside of the local subnet.

  1. Discover.
  Workstation sends a UDP67 broadcast.

  2. Offer
  DHCP sees request by workstation, responds with UDP/68 to the workstation with an IP address offer.

  3. Request
  Send a broadcast over UDP 67 requesting a particular IP address that it received from offer step.

  4. Acknowledge
  Server formally acknowledges this, workstation now has that IP address.


APIPA - Automatic Private IP addressing. Link-local address. Automatic address assigned by workstation if it can't get to DHCP server. Can communicate with local subnet, but can't communicate outside of it.
169.254.0.1 - 169.254.255.254

Sends an ARP frame to confirm there's no IP conflict when workstation is assigning APIPA address.

IPv6 link-local address
FE80::/10. only one subnet allocated. Required on every IPv6-enabled interface. Not always random, may be configured based off of MAC address. Also non-routable.

---------------------------
7. Using IP Addresses

SSL VPN - Uses SSL/TLS protocol. Authenticate users, don't need to digital certificates. Can be run from a browser or VPN client.

Client-to-Site VPN. AKA remote access VPN. Requires software on user device, might be built into OS.


LAN - Local Area Network
Group of devices that share in the same broadcast domain.


VLAN - logically separated LANs.

---------------------------------
8. Internet Connection Types
Many different kinds of connection types.

Cable modem
Broadband communication - Transmission across many different frequencies and traffics over the single cable.

DOCSIS - Standard over cable networks that traffic gets sent over cable modems


Dialup
Network over voice telephone lines. 56kbit/s modems, can compress data up to 320 kilobit/s
Relatively slow, difficult to scale. Common in Enterprise environments as a backup.


Fiber
Very high speed networking. Converged services (voice, video, data). Enhanced features.


Satellite
Non-terrestrial communication. Relatively high cost, can get 50Mbit/s down, 3Mbit/s up.
Good for remote, hard to reach sites. High latency though.
2GHz signal, needs good line of site.


ISDN
Integrated Services Digital Network
  BRI - Basic Rate Interface (2B+D)
    2 64kbit/s bearer channels
    1 16kbit/s signaling channel. Manages the connection.

  PRI - Primary Rate Interface. Delivered over T1/E1
    T1 - 23B + D
    E1 - 30B + D + alarm channel
    Commonly used as a PSTN to large PBX


Cell Networks
Separate land into "cells." Antenna coverages a cell within a certain frequency.


Line-Of-Site services
Visual path between antennas, high frequencies. Common in metropolitan areas. Non-LOS is also available.

WiMAX - Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access. Wireless high-speed Non-LOS internet access.

--------------------------
9. Network Types

LAN - Local Area Network. Local is relative.
Ethernet and 802.11 wireless.


WAN - Wide area network
Generally connect LANs at a distance. Point-to-Point serial, MPLS, etc.


PAN - Personal Area Network
Own Private network. Bluetooth, IR, NFC, etc.


MAN - Metropolitan Area Network
Network in your city, Larger than a LAN, smaller than a WAN. Usually managed by a central area network provider.
MAN common to see government ownership. Connected via Metro Ethernet.


WMN - Wireless Mesh Network
All devices connected together. Commonly associated with IoT. Self form, self heal. 802.11, Zigbee, Z-Wave, etc.
