1. Laser Printers
Use a laser, high voltage, ions, powdered ink to create very high quality, fast printing speeds.

Disadvantages to Laser printer:
  - Very complex, many moving parts
  - requires memory
  - messy on the inside

Imaging drum - Image drawn into photosensitive drum. Painted with a laser. Picks up toner, can be separated from toner cartridge but often with the cartridge.

Fuser assembly - Heat and pressure done to melt and fuse ink to paper.

Color laser printers use 4 colors: cyan, yellow, magenta black. May use 4 separate cartridges.
Image is transferred from all cartridges to a single transfer belt. Belt then transfers to a roller which makes it to the page.

Pickup roller - picks up a single page at a time and moves it into the printer for printing. Problems if rollers aren't picking up one roller at a time.

Separation pad - Pull just the top sheet from the paper tray. Usually right on the paper tray, relatively inexpensive.

Duplex assembly - Printers usually print on a single side. Duplexing assembly lets printer flips page internally to print on the other side.

Printing process:
  1. Processing - data being sent to printer, printer is building out page in memory before starting printing. This must be totally rendered in memory before starting printing.
  2. Charging - Prepare drum with a negative charge with charging roller.
  3. Exposing - Laser writes out image on drum by neutralizing negative charge where toner should be at for image.
  4. Developing - Get toner from toner cartridge to sections of neutralized sections. Toner only sticks on neutralized sections.
  5. Transferring - Transfer toner from photosensitive drum to paper
  6. Fusing - Melt toner onto paper with the fusers.
  7. Cleaning - clean toner off photosensitive drum so it's ready for next print.

-----------------------------
2. Laser Printer Maintenance

If toner cartridge gets low, you'll usually get warning messages that toner is getting low.
Toner can also contain the OPC drum - Organic Photoconductor drum: very sensitive to light so keep it in bag till it's ready to be replaced.

Laser printer parts wear out over time. Many manufacturers have maintenance kits to replace standard parts in the printer. Usually perform maintenance based on page count.

Once maintenance has been performed, good to calibrate it. Can be automated but may also be manual.

Laser printers can also get very dirty. Use water or IPA, don't use harsh chemicals. Don't use a normal vacuum cleaner because of the toner.

Use cold water to wash off toner.

--------------------------------
3. Inkjet Printers

AKA, Ink dispersion printers. Relatively inexpensive compared to laser printers. Also very quiet as well, and in high resolutions.

They're very expensive though. Ink isn't permanent either, so it will eventually fade. They also clog easily.

May use CYMK - Cyan, magenta, yellow, key (black)


Ink jet and print head are usually integrated in same component. Larger, more expensive printers may separate these.

Feed rollers pick up and feed paper through paper.

Carriage and belt - moves the ink jet and head across the paper to disperse ink accordingly.

If misalignment occurs, good idea to calibrate the printer.

------------------------------
4. Inkjet Printer Maintenance

Ink can clog very easily, so may see a daily cleaning maintenance done automatically.

Clogged ink can cause streaks or missing sections of color. Cleaning process can start manually, and you can even clean a print head manually if necessary.

Replacing cartridges
Often separated colors, but some cartridges may combine them. Take seconds to replace.

Inkjet Printer Calibration
Align nozzles to the paper, lines should be crisp, colors shouldn't overlap. Printer includes the option. Should be done after replacing print head.

Clearing jams
Jams can happen often. Remove loose paper, use firm pressure but don't rip them. Open printer and see if there are any leftover scraps.

---------------------------
5. Thermal Printers
Doesn't have ink or toner, uses a special type of paper. Heated portions of the paper turns black. Very quiet, common for receipt machines.

Very sensitive to white and heat, and may fade over time. Not good for archiving. Clear tape may also cause black to fade quickly.

Heating Element
No moving parts, heats certain parts at a time.

Thermal paper
Paper covered with a chemical that changes color when heated. Looks like normal paper.

------------------------------------
6. Thermal Printer Maintenance
Paper is relatively inexpensive, but impossible to substitute. Make sure the paper is the right spec for the printer.

Use IPA to clean the heating element, and a cleaning pen. Check recommendations for manufacturer.

May also use a cleaning card which cleans the element and paper pathway.

Not much debris since no toner, maybe some paper bits. Avoid using vacuum as static electricity can cause an issue.

-------------------------------------
7. Impact Printer
Printer that makes an impact to mark the output.

Dot-matrix printer - presses a ribbon to make a mark on the paper. Good for carbon/multiple copy paper. Low cost per page.
Very noisy though. Low resolution.

Dot matrix has a matrix of pins that impact onto paper to make the character on the page.

Printer ribbon - one long ribbon of ink that pins push against to make the image. Easy to replace, one single ribbon. Size is usually proprietary and model-specific.

Tractor feed - continuous long feed with perforations between pages. Holes on the side are used to pull paper through the printer. Must be aligned to go through printer properly.

-----------------------------------
8. Impact Printer Maintenance
Ribbon gets rotated around many times and eventually gets too light to be readable. Designed to be very modular so easy to replace.

Print head can take a lot of abuse, but eventually pins may stop working an you'll need to rep it. Gets very hot so be careful when replacing. Also modular.

Paper can be a bit difficult to replace as tractor holds must be aligned correctly.

-----------------------------------
9. Virtual and 3D Printers

Virtual Printers
No physical output, output to a digital output. Useful for sending to a file.
Print to file option in print options in Windows. File will be in an output format specific to that printer when done like this. Copy filename LPT

Print to PDF - Adobe PDF
Portable document format. One-way path from app to PDF. Proprietary Adobe format, requires specialized software to create and view PDF. Many browsers have built-in PDF viewers.

Print to XPS - XML Paper Specification
Microsoft XPS, similar to PDF but to XPS.
Available all the way to XP, viewable with an XPS reader.

Print to image
Print to a graphics image for later editing/sharing. Not integrated into the OS. Third-party image print drivers available.

3d Printers
Print in 3 dimensions. AKA additive manufacturing. Good for rapid prototyping.
