25. AWS Organziations

Allows you to manage billing and access  to multiple AWS accounts for your business.
Offer policy-based management for multiple AWS accounts. Enables you to centrally manage policies across multiple accounts.
Create SCP (Service Control Policies) that centrally control AWS service use across multiple AWS accounts. Automate creation of new accoutns through APIs.

Available to all AWS customers at no additional charge.

Consolidated billing - allows you to view, manage, and pay bills for multiple AWS accoutns through one user interface.
Enables you to set up a single payment method for all accounts in your organization.

Benefits:
Central location to manage billing across all your AWS accounts
Gain volume discounts for usage across all your AWS accounts.

------------------------------
26. AWS Pricing Model

Principals:
1. Works on a pay-as-you-go model. Only pay for what you use, when you are using it. No upfront cost.
2. No long term contracts or complex licensing required. Some exceptions possible for EC2 instances.
3. Volume discounts available.
4. No termination fees.
5. Free tier available, free-of-charge for 12 months.

S3:
Charged for:
  Storage Pricing:
  data-at-rest
  charged per gigabyte
  depends on region and storage class as well.

  Request Pricing:
  PUT,POST,LIST,GET requests
  Lifecycle transition requests
  Data retrieval, archive, restore

EC2:
Charged per second based on an hourly rate for the amount of time instance is in a running state. Reserved instances are in 1 or 3 year terms regardless of use.

Hourly rates depend on:
  Purchasing option you choose: on-demand, reserved, or Spot
  Instance type
  AMI type
  Region

Also charged for transferring data in/out of an instance.

Pricing can be complex!

---------------------------
27. Pricing and Cost Tools

TCO Calculator - total cost of ownership. Free tool that allows you to estimate the cost savings of using AWS Cloud vs. using on-prem.
1. Shows how much you can save by using AWS. Helps you reduce by avoiding large capital expenditures on IT infrastructure and hardware
2. Can provide directional guidance on cost savings.
3. Put in elements of your current/theoretical on-prem and comparing those cost requirements to how much it would cost in AWS.
4. Elements can be added/modified as you move through the process to best estimate the cost savings.

Cost Explorer - Free tool that allows you to view charts of your costs.
1. Cost data for the past 13 months.
2. Forecast spending over next 3 months.
3. Use explorer to discover patterns in how much you spend on AWS over time.
4. Identify which services you use the most.

------------------------------
28. Shared Responsibility Model

Defines what you and AWS are responsible for when it comes to security and compliance.
AWS responsible for host operating system, virtualization, down to physical security of facilities where service operates.
Customer assumes responsibility and management of guest OS, associated app software as well as config of AWS provided secuurity group firewall.

AWS Responsible for:
1. Setup and maintenance of physical hardware located at each data center.
2. Physical security data centers
3. Setup and aintenance of host virtualization software.

Customer responsible for:
1. Network level security
2. Operating system patched and updates.
3. IAM user access management
4. Client/server side data encryption.

Not all-inclusive lists.


DDoS Protection is built-in/mitigated by many core AWS services.

DDoS Built-in Protection/Mitigation:
1. Route 53
2. CloudFront
3. WAF - web application firewall
4. ELB
5. VPCs and Security Groups

Pen Testing:
Practice of testing one's own application security for vulnerability by simulating an attack.
AWS allows penetration testing, but must request permission from AWS before doing pen testing.

Pen testing allowed on:
  EC2
  RDS
  Aurora
  CloudFront
  API Gateway
  Lambda
  LightSail

---------------------------------------
29. Support Plans and Trusted Advisor

Support Plans
1. Basic - Included with any AWS Account. No access to cloud support rep.
2. Developer starts at 29$/month. Business hour access to cloud support associate
3. Business Starts at $100/month. 24x7 access to a cloud support engineer
4. Enterprise starts at $15,000/month. 24x7 access to a sr. cloud support engineer

AWS trusted advisor - online service that "advises" and helps you optimize aspects of your AWS account.

Trusted advisor categories:
1. Cost optimization
2. performance
3. Security
4. Fault tolerance

Six basic checks for performance and security
1. Security groups - port checks
2. IAM use
3. MFA enabled on root IAM user account
4. EBS public snapshots
5. RDS public snapshots
6. service limits

Business/enterprise get access to:
  1. Full list of trusted advisor checks
  2. Notifications to stay up-to-date with weekly resource deployments
  3. Programmatic access to retrieve/refresh trusted advisor results via API

If you think account is compromised:
  1. Change AWS root account password.
  2. Change IAM user's passwords.
  3. Delete and rotate all API access keys.
  4. Delete any resources you didn't create.
  5. Respond to any notifications you receive from AWS through the support center and open a support case.

-----------------------------------------
30. AWS Whitepaper and Documentation

Collection of technical documents that outline many AWS relevant topics such as:
  1. Architecture best practices
  2. Security best practices
  3. Cloud computing economics
  4. Serverless architecture

All white papers have been reviewed by many parties.

AWS Service Documentation - collection of documents specific to each AWS service. Provide technical explanations and walkthroughs on how to use each service and features.
Tells you how something works, much more specific than the whitepaper documentation.
