1. Connectors

RJ11 Connector
6P2C connector, for telephones.

RJ14 use 6P4C for dual-line use.


RJ45 Connector
8P8C Connector. Similar to RJ48C, used with T1/WAN data lines


BNC Connector
Bayonet Neill-Concelman connector. Type of Coaxial connector for DS3 WAN links.
Rigid and bulky, hard to work with.


F Connector
Cable Television, cable modems may use this. RG-6 or RG59 threaded connector.

---------------------
2. Overview of Memory

RAM - Random Access Memory.

DIMM - Dual Inline memory module. Has contacts on both sides of the module that are different. 64 bit data width.

SO-DIMM - Half the width of DIMM.

DRAM - Type of memory on dimm. Dynamic because needs constant refreshing, or data disappears. Very fast though.

Random because can access any part of memory at any time.

SDRAM - Synchronous DRAM. Synchronized with system clock, can queue up one process while waiting for another. Older RAM didn't queue.

DDR - Dual Data rate. Can pull information from the upside and downside of the clock cycle.

DDR2 twice as fast as DDR. Not backwards or forwards compatible.

DDR3 twice data rates of DDR2. Also increased max capacity to 16GB per DIMM. Also not backwards compatible.

DDR4 faster than DDR3. Max capacity per dimm is 64GB. Not backwards compatible.

---------------------------------
3. Memory Technologies

Multi-channel memory - multiple RAM in specific slots increases performance. Exact matches are best.

Parity memory - Adds additional parity bit, determines when an error has occurred but not always, but won't correct it.

ECC memory - Detects and corrects errors on the fly. Looks like ECC memory.

Parity - Even parity: parity bit makes an even number. If not, then it knows it's an error.

-------------------------
4. Storage Devices

Optical formats
Small bumps read with a laser beam.

CD-ROM - hold 700MB of data.
DVD-ROM - 4.7GB on a single layer, 8.5GB on dual layer (DVD-R DL)
BD-R - 25GB single layer, 50GB dual layer.
BD-RE - Blu ray disk erasable. Can be rewritten.

Burners darken photosensitive dye, not creating bumps to write data.


SSD - No moving parts. Non-volatile.


M.2 interface - much smaller than SSD. Can give us direct access to PCI-e bus. May be a B key, or M key, or even both.
  B-key PCI-e x2
  M-Key PCI-e x4


Flash memory
EEPROM - Electrically Erasable programmable read-only memory. Non-volatile, no power required to retain data.
Has a limited number of writes, but can still read. No designed for archival storage, easy to lose or damage. Always have a backup.

---------------------------
5. RAID
Redundant Array of Independent/Inexpensive Disks

Different RAID levels, some redundant, some not.

RAID 0 - Striping.
  File blocks are split between two or more physical drives. High performance, data is written quickly. No redundancy, if drive fails all the data is lost.

RAID 1 - Mirroring.
  File blocks are duplicated between two or more physical drives. High disk utilization, double space requirements, but redundant.

RAID 5 - Striping with Parity
  Files are striped along with a parity block. Requires at least three disks. Can reconstruct data if one drive is lost. High redundancy, parity calculation may affeect performance though.

Nested RAID/RAID 10 - Stripe of mirrors.
  Striped data with mirrors. Need at least 4 drives. Redundant and fast but needs 4 drives.


Software RAID
Feature build into OS. Doesn't need any special hardware, usually lower performance than hardware-based.

Hardware RAID
Feature of a hard drive controller. Configured outside of the OS, usually invisible to it. High performance, designed for speeds.


Hot swappable drives
Able to remove and add drives while system is running. Easy to repair, combine RAID for 100% uptime.
