Adding commands

All about extensibility. Yo. Like MMC but for scripting. Product-specific shell shortcuts are still the same powershell. Not limited to a single product!

Snapins are like modules, but require DLLs. Microsoft moving away from them.
Modular management tools. One shell can open multiple.



get-pssnapin -registered : tells us what snapins are available and installed.

add-pssnapin sqlservercmdletsnapin100 : Loads a snapin. In this case, sqlservercmdletsnapin100


gcm (Get-Command)

gcm -pssnapin sqlservercmdletsnapin100 : Lists what commands a snapin has added to PoSh


Snapins may add new providers as well.


--------------------
Modules

Similar to snapins, but designed to be more self-contained and somewhat easier to distribute.

Don't require advanced registration, PoSh automatically looks in a certain set of paths to find them.

PSModulePath - Defines paths where PoSh expects modules to live. Windows environment variable. Not defined in PoSH.
get-content env:PSModulePath

get-module : returns modules loaded in PoSh

remove-module : removes modules loaded.

Import-Module : imports a module via path if it hasn't been auto-loaded.

PowerShell modules with same cmdlet names have the last loaded cmdlet run. To specify another version use:
<module>\<cmdlet>, eg.; MyCoolSnapin\Get-User

Microsoft recommends adding a produect-specific prefix, like AD or SQL to the noun of each command to prevent these kinds of conflicts.

Remove-pssnapin or remove modulke - unloads an extension.

-----------------------
Export-Console [-Path] : Export PoSh console with snapins so you don't need to manually load them all again next time.

powershellget - like yum or rpm for linux. A way to get new modules over the internet. http://powershellgallery.com

Register-psrepository - add url of a repository.
Find-module - find modules in repositories. Can use wildcards, tags, and other helpers to help narrow search
install-module - download modules.
update-module - updates modules.
