23. Database Services

Relation database - AKA SQL
Non-relational database - AKA NoSQL

Amazon offers services for both databases.

RDS - SQL databases
DynamoDB - NoSQL databases

RDS - Relational Database Services
SQL database service that provides a wide range of SQL database options to select from
Web service that makes it easier to set up, opearte, and scale a relational database in the cloud.
Resizeable capacity while automating time-consuming administration tasks.


Includes:
Amazon Aurora
MySQL
MariaDB
PostgreSQL
Oracle
Microsoft SQL Server

DynamoDB
NoSQL database service. Does not provide other NoSQL options
Database service for all applications that need consistent, single-digit millisecond latency at any scale. Fully managed cloud database and supports both document and key-value store models.
Good for applications that need high performance databases.

Can replace:
MongoDB
Cassandra DB
Oracle NoSQL

SQL - stores data in tables, for very structured data, like contact lists.
NoSQL - for non-structured data such as cataloging documents. In JSON-like, name-value documents.

Benefits:

RDS
When you need a SQL database option
Easy to set up, highly available, fault-tolerant, Scalable
Used when data is clearly defined
Common use cases include online stores and banking systems

DynamoDB
When you need a NoSQL database option
Fast, highly scalable, and fully-managed
Used when data is fluid and can change
Common use cases include social networks, web analytics


-----------------------------------------
24. ElastiCache and Redshift
Data caching service used to help improve speed/performance of web applications running on AWS
Scale in-memory data store or cache in the cloud. Improves performance of web applications by allowing you to retrieve information from fast, managed, secure in-memory data stores

Supports two open-source in-memory engines:
Redis - Fast, open source, in-memory data store and cache
MemcacheD - a widely adopted memory object caching system

Redshift
Data warehouse database service designed to handle petabytes of data for analysis using your existing business intelligence (BI) tools.
Fast, fully managed data warehouse. Complex analytic queries against petabytes of structured data.
