1. Mobile Devices

Tablets
May run IOS, or Android. Generally larger than 7" diagonally. Designed for touch input.
Good for a multimedia machine.

Smart phones
The suped up cell phone. Small computer in your pocket. Media viewer, mobile apps, and anything else that is built for it.

Wearable technology
Something that you wear on a person. An extension of your phone and body.

Virtual Reality
Remove the real world, replace what you can see with computer-generated graphics. inputs from the real world interacts with the virtual world.
Great for games, design applications, and whatever your imagination can take you.

Augmented Reality
The combination of the real world with virtual. Google Glasses anyone?
Computer adds additional detail to the real world.

e-reader
Specifically created to read books. Might have some multimedia abilities. They may use electronic paper instead of normal LCD screens.
Generally have high battery life. Almost exclusively use network connectivity via Wi-Fi.

GPS
In-car navigation machine. Requires a view of the sky and will need to be periodically updated.

----------------------------
2. Mobile Device Connections
Many different ways to physically and wireless connect mobile devices.

Micro-USB - EU standardized this so all mobile devices must support this. Mini-B plug slightly larger. Older devices may use this.

USB-C - 24pin connector. Doesn't matter which way you plug it in. About the same size as the micro B USB plug. Can act as a 3.1/2.0 connection.
USB C also includes an analog audio option, so they can be used as audio cables as well.

Lightning - Apple proprietary 8pin connector. Higher output, simpler design, can be inserted either way.

Tethering
Physically connect a device to your mobile phone. Use the phone's data to access the internet via the phone. Can access the internet basically anywhere with your laptop.
This may require some configuration with your wireless carrier.

Hotspot
Phone can turn into an 802.11 wireless router. This hotspot option though is generally controlled by the carrier.

Proprietary mobile interfaces was common in the early days of mobile tech. Completely different cable for data, but standardization has pushed these problems away.
Maybe one cable for just data, and another for just power. What a pain!

NFC - Near field communication
Allows you to use mobile device to transfer small bits of data, like a payment system, bus token, NFC contact exchange. All of this is encrypt-able.

Bluetooth - Higher speed than NFC. AKA, PAN. Let you connect a variety of devices to your mobile device.

IR - Infrared
Almost exclusively used for entertainment centers nowadays. Used to have limited data and printing capabilities but 802.11 has basically completely replaced it in that arena.

-----------------------------------
3. Mobile Device Accessories

Headsets
Lets you have hands-free audio.
  Wired headsets - connects via a 3.5 TRRS connector (Tip-ring-ring-sleeve). The extra ring lets you have microphone, if it doesn't have a microphone, it may just be TRS. Analog audio, but iPhones may use the lightning port.
  Wireless headsets - will connect via Bluetooth.

Speakers
Battery powered and may most likely be Bluetooth linked. They're small and portable.

Game pads
Controller to let you play games on your mobile device better.

Extra battery packs are also an option for certain phones. Maybe consider using a power bank instead if you can't easily replace the battery and need more juice.

Protective Covers
  Screen protector - Lets you help avoid scratches on the screen, but may take some work to install
  Device protector - wrap the entire device, may even have water proofing options depending on the type of protector. Do note that these can interfere with wireless charging.

Credit card readers
Phone can become a POS terminal. Connects through some sort of port of Bluetooth, great for small and mobile businesses. Just as instant as a normal POS, works via the internet.

Memory/microSD
Option of increasing storage capacity. May not work with some phones though. microSD is a small form factor.

--------------------------------------
4. Mobile Device Connectivity
Remember that your phone is connected to the internet. Take advantage of this.

Hotspot
Turn your phone into a Wi-Fi router, but may have to pay extra. Other devices connect to your phone via Wi-Fi.

Tethering
Anchor your phone to a laptop, connect your laptop via USB or Bluetooth. It's only a single connection, and again, may need to deal with the service provider to enable this...

Airplane mode - one button turns off all connections. Good for when you get on an airplane. Alternatively, can also just disable the Wi-Fi connection as well with a single button.

Bluetooth
PAN to about 10 meters or less. Can connect multiple different devices. Once paired, devices work automatically. Once paired, usually don't need to pair again.
Devices must be set to discovery mode to pair it. Note that many devices may appear! Remember to deal with the PIN.

Baseband radio processor - To connect to a provider's network, needs radio. Network interface for your radio.
Basically its own mini computer, own firmware and memory. Quite proprietary, and has its own real-time operating system. Firmware can be updated OTA (over the air)

PRL updates - preferred roaming list. Type of updates. Common to CDMA networks (ie., Verizon, Sprint). Allows your phone to connect to the right tower OTA to get updates.

PRI updates - Product release instructions. Another type of updates for a phone. Has specific radio settings, like ID numbers, network codes, country codes, etc. Also done OTA so you may never know this was done.

IMEI - International Mobile Station Equipment Identity. Identifies a physical mobile device. Each phone has its own unique IMEI. Can be used to allow or disallow access.

IMSI - International Mobile Subscriber Identity. Identifies a user on a network. Can be programmed on a SIM card so you can switch a SIM card to move between phones.

VPN - Virtual Private Network. Creates a secure channel between both endpoints. Usually integrated into the phone OS, but third party options available. May require additional setup and may support RSA.

---------------------------------------
5. Configuring Email on Mobile Devices

Email configurations.
  Retrieving email: POP3, IMAP protocols
  Sending email: SMTP

  Corporate email: Microsoft Exchange, this is different than the standard protocols.

  Other solutions may have unique solutions as well.

Retrieving mail messages
  POP3 - Post Office Protocol 3. Been around for a very long time. Used for downloading mail to local mail client. Downloads and can also delete email from the server.
    Not used that often anymore as it's made to use one device. Legacy apps may use this.
    Default ports: TCP/110, if SSL (POP3S) then TCP/995

    IMAP - Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP4). Access mail on a central server, mail is usually stored here. Supports folder and server-side searching.
      Configuration information: Name of IMAP server, username, password.
      Default ports: TCP/143, SSL (IMAPS): TCP/993

Sending email
  SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. Send mail from device to a mail server, or between mail servers. Authentication usually required, may be different credentials than incoming mail.
    Default ports: TCP/25 with no authentication (relatively unused), SMTP w/ authentication: TCP/587

Enterprise email
Much more robust option than simple home email. May use Microsoft exchange. Have contacts, calendars, reminders, and much more. Integrates with mobile device database and integrate with the device's data.
Can encrypt message with S/MIME - Secure/Multipurpose email Extensions. Allows you to encrypt and digitally sign messages from Exchange.

Commercial Email Providers

Gmail - Google emails, lets you split inbox into tabs, IMAP4, POP3 also available.

Exchange Online (hosted email). IMAP4 and POP3 support. Exchange's online solution.

iCloud Mail - Apple Mail, IMAP4 support

-----------------------------------------
6. Mobile device synchronization
No single desktop anymore, many different devices. All of this data needs to be sync'd and accessed at any time.
This process is generally invisible, but security is important. Authentication must work between each device to sync.

Sync to the Cloud
May be completely hands off. No physical cables, local files. May be integrated with Exchange or Gmail. Choose how you access your cloud option.
  Apple iOS - sync all data to iCloud. Complete backup and recovery if needed.
  Android - Configure your Google account, and Google account manages your cloud syncing.

Sync to the Desktop
This will require an OS and disk space. Relatively minimal memory, may require extensive amount of HDD storage though.
  -iOS has Apple iTunes, syncs everything in the phone and can create full backups on the computer.
  -Android may use Google, but there's no standard way to sync everything. Use third party apps to do this.

Sync to your car
This can be done over Bluetooth or a cable. Extend your phone functionality into the car. Maybe see big maps, phone calls, play music on your car.
iOS CarPlay, Android Auto. Syncs contact info, music, and much more. This could be a security risk though especially with rented cars or shared vehicles.

Sync Connections
Options to sync data between the two big mobile solutions
  iOS: USB, 30-pin connector, 8-pin lightning, USB-C, 802.11, mobile network.
  Android: USB Micro-B, USB-C, 802.11, mobile network
