1. Motherboard Form Factors

Four form factors to know:
  ATX - Largest of these. For beefy computers, servers due to the amount of slots and power abilities.
  microATX - More limited slots due to the smaller size than ATX. Might be more appropriate for smaller home PCs. Compatible with ATX mounting points.
  ITX
  mini-ITX - Created by VIA technologies back in '01. Compatible with ATX and microATX mounting points. Useful for single-purpose PCs that need to take up a little room like a media box. Very limited in space.

Don't worry about exact dimensions, but their use case.

-----------------------------------
2. Motherboard expansion slots.

Buses are used to transfer data between different components on the board.

Expansion slots use expansion bus to connect different components. Use to refer to parallel buses in width. Now it's in bandwidth for serial.

1 MHz - 1 million cycles per second.
1 GHz = 1 billion cycles per second.

Clock speed doesn't equal transfer rate. DDR3 SDRAM can transfer 64 times the memory clock speed.


PCI - Peripheral Component Interconnect (noone calls it that)
32/64bit bus width.

Depending on the version of PCI, you may see these transfer speeds:
  133MB/s for 32bit @ 33MHz
  266MB/s for 32bit @ 66MHz/64bit @ 33MHz
  533MB/s for 64 bit @ 66MHz

PCI expansion slots may be connected to the southbridge generally speaking.

Short slots are 32 bit, 64 bit is the larger PCI slots. PCI slot itself will generally provide the power at 3.3v or 5v. The power that a card may need depends on the notch.
  Notch closest to case = 3.3v, closer to center = 5v, even closest to center = 64 bit notch.


PCI-e - PCI Express. Will see these instead of PCI on modern motherboards. Has completely replaced PCI-X, AGP
Communicates serially, unidirectional "lanes." Not all devices share lanes, so slower devices don't slow everyone down.

Will see lanes in: x1, x2, x4, x8, x16, x32.
Describes how many pairs of lanes are between the slots.

Different version of PCI-e supports different speeds:
  v1.x: 250MB/S
  v2.x: 500MB/s
  v3.0: ~1GB/s
  v4.0: ~2GB/s
  v5.0: Expected in 2019, 4GB/s

Note the hook on the card and the latch on the board slot when installing a PCI-E card

Riser cards can let you install cards perpendicularly due to size constraints.

------------------------------------
3. Motherboard Connectors

CPU Sockets - These are matched to the motherboard, motherboard is usually designed to work with the socket.
Central to everything. Can't really upgrade a socket as the motherboard is so closely integrated to it.

ZIF socket - Zero insertion force. Full of little holes for PGA (pin grid array) CPU.

LGA socket - Land grid array. Reverse of PGA. No pin to damage on CPU. Needs an LGA CPU

-----------------------------
4. BIOS
Basic Input/Output System. Firmware used to manage system. Used to be stored on ROM memory, but now on flash so it can be upgraded.

POST - Power On Self Test. Checks hardware to see if it usable.

Legacy BIOS - Older traditional BIOS.

UEFI BIOS - Unified Extensible Firmware Interface. A defined standard for manufacturers, designed to replace legacy BIOS.
Can boot drives > 2.2TB, GPT disks (GUID partition table). Also supports FAT and removable media boot.

Includes a pre-boot environment for remote diagnostics.

Used to store BIOS settings on CMOS (Complementary metal-oxide semiconductor) memory. Now all settings saved on flash. Battery would refresh CMOS so settings wouldn't get lost.
Nowadays this battery is used to maintain date and time. Jumpers are used to reset flash memory settings now.

------------------------
5. BIOS options

Disable fast startup if you want to access BIOS on restart as it causes the PC to not shut down all the way and you'll miss the ability to get to BIOS.

Diagnostic checks built into BIOS focused on hardware checks, doesn't touch OS.

Maybe take a picture of BIOS config in case you do something you don't want to.

-----------------------
6. BIOS Security

BIOS supervisor password - stops BIOS settings changes from being made, but BIOS will still bootl. NOT the same as a BIOS password.

FDE - full disk encryption. Everything on the disk is encrypted. Windows uses BitLocker. BIOS integrates with TPM

TPM - Built into systems, can generate cryptographic keys, store them, etc

LoJack - Software that lets you track where laptop is. Built into BIOS, so it will continue to be installed even if it's removed or OS is reformatted.
Can even do a theft mode which can lock down laptop if lost.

Secure boot - Part of UEFI spec. digitally signs known-good software. Software can't run without proper signature.

---------------------------------
7. Installing BIOS upgrades

Older motherboards involved replacing older ROM chip with newer one. Now we just flash memory.

msinfo32 could tell you all relevant system information.

Older upgrades may use floppy. Newer upgrades are an executable from the OS, or via flash drive.

--------------------------------
8. Peripherals

Printers
ADF - Automatic Document feeder for a printer. Input a large amount of papers that will be automatically get scanned by a scanner.


Projectors
Use Metal-halide lamp. Very bright, measured in lumens. Relatively expensive lamps. Always let bulbs cool as fans may continue to run after shutting it off to cool the fan.

--------------------------------
9. Computer Power
NOTE: Always discount from the power source when working on a device. Drain capacitors before beginning work.

Computer uses DC voltage, but most power sources provide AC voltage.

Power supplies may convert 115/220AC to 3.3v DC, 5.5v DC, and/or 12v DC so it's usable for your pc.


Ampere (amp, A) - Rate of electron flow past a point in one sec. The diameter of a hose.
Voltage (volt, v) - Electrical "pressure" pushing the electrons. How a faucet is.
Watt (W) - Measurement of real power use. volts * amps = watts.


Alternating current (AC) - Direction of current constantly reverses. Allows us to efficiently distribute electricity over long distances.
US/Canada 110/120 volts of VAC, 60Hz
EU - 220-240 VAC, 50Hz

DC - Direct current. Current in a constant single direction.

Some PSUs may have a switch that would let you set the input to the type of power you're connecting to. Many other PSUs are auto switching so may not need to do this.

24 Pin connector is the primary connector on a motherboard, provides +3.3V, +/- 5V, +/- 12v

Original ATX standard was 20 pin, 24 was added for PCI-e power. If you only have a 24 pin connector, this will still work with a 20 pin, just have 4 pins hanging over.

Voltages may be referred as positive or negative. Voltage is a difference in potential. More common to find positive output than negative. Older stuff may use negative voltages.

Video cards tend to use the most amount of power. 50% capacity is good rule of thumb for sizing PSU.

--------------------------------------
10. Customer Computer Systems

CAD - Computer Aided Design
CAM - Computer aided Manufacturing.
May want SSD, high end video, and high amount of RAM for CAD/CAM systems.


Audio/Video editing workstations
May want SSDs, and specialized audio/video cards, along with dual monitors.


Virtualiation Workstation
Will want as much RAM as possible, and CPUs with many cores.


Gaming PC
SSDs, high end GPU, good sound card, good cooling systems.


NAS
Recommended to have a Gigabit NIC, and RAID array-type drives high capacity.


Traditional computers are known as thick clients. Everything is run off locally from the hardware.

Thin clients are where applications are accessed remotely from the thin client. Usually used for VDI so only thing that's running locally is keyboard, mouse and screen.
They'll only need just enough power to run an OS, but will want good network hardware to maintain connection to the remote system it's connected to.

---------------------------------------
11. Common Devices

May be a good idea to set up a VPN and hard drive encryption for thick clients, especially for laptops.

MDM - Mobile Device Management - manage company phones/tables. Provide remote management, and security. Application management also enforceable.

-------------------------------
12. SOHO Multifunction Devices

Can't mix and match print drives, must use the specific drivers for specific printers.

Duplex mode - printing on both sides of the page without manually flipping it over. Not all printers can do this.

Collate - Print multiple copies iin their proper order. Very useful for many copies of large documents.

Most common connector on printer is the type B printer, type a on the computer. Older computers may use DB-25/parallel connector for the computer, and a centronics interface on the printer. Usually on legacy machines.

May also see bluetooth connectivity for a printer for mobile printing, but more common to see Wi-fi connections for wireless connectivity.

Infrastructure mode - many devices access an access point and in turn can access the printer.
Ad hoc mode - devices directly connect to the printer, may need additional configuration settings.

Integrated print server - printer can manage queues, and have docs directly printed to the printer. Can usually access management via a web console.

Other printers can also do cloud sharing.

Common Network Printing Ports:
TCP/139, TCP/445, UDP/137, UDP/138

d
Apple devices may need Bonjour service to access printers. Apple software installed on Windows may also use Bonjour.

AirPrint - Print from iOS to compatible devices.

NOTE: Prints from a local system creates a file of the output. Output file is sent to the print server spooler, but sometimes the spool file isn't always deleted right away from a printer when a printout is complete.
