1. Laptop Hardware
There are many key differences to laptops compared to desktops. This is due to what purpose they serve, which is a more mobile and compact computing option.
Keyboards on a laptop are much smaller than a full desktop one. Much more compact. ex.; function keys are much more compact.
Numpad generally also not present, but not always the case. 17" laptops could have the numpad but space remains a premium.

Laptop storage
Same types of storage you may find in a desktop.

SSD - Solid State Drive
  -All memory, no moving parts
  -Silent, less latency
  -2.5 and 1.8 inch form factors.

SSHD - Solid State Hybrid Drive
  -Flash memory and hard drive. SSD portion usually caches the hard drive data.

Magnetic Disk
  -Traditional spinning disk platters.

Generally all internal, may require you to remove a cover and some screws on the back. Can be very modular.
Storage generally designed to be very easy to replace.


Laptop Memory
Same type of memory as desktop memory, but form factor may be different. Smaller to accommodate for the more limited space.

SO-DIMM - Small Outline Dual In-line Memory Module
Micro-DIMM - Micro-Dual In-line Memory Module


Smart card reader
May see these more often in laptop. Generally built into laptop, or there could be an external one that may be USB connected.


Optical drive
They've become too large for today's portable drives, so becoming more difficult to find. They're now often removable.
Read and write CD-RW/CD-ROM and DVD-RW/DVDROM


Wireless Card
Laptops generally have a wireless card instead of physical ethernet jack.
  WLAN - Wireless LAN. 802.11
  WWAN - For cellular connections
  WPAN - For bluetooth.

Laptops may generally have these types of wireless connections. May come in Mini-PCI or Mini PCI-e form factor for these.


Video adapter
Often integrated into the processor. Not upgradeable if that's the case. Sometimes these are part of the system board as well. These are also not upgradeable.
However, some laptops do have upgradeable video cards, but laptops like these aren't slimline types


Screen
LCD - Liquid Crystal Display. These are very fragile so you'd want a good case. Often uses a fixed resolution so changes to resolutions may look blurry or not as crisp.


DC jack
Laptops need direct current to operate. Auto-switching or fixed input. Converts AC to DC.
Input is 110/220 volts depending where you are in the world. DC jack is usually model specific to the power supply.


Laptop power - AC adapters
Generally use Li-ion batteries. Common in consumer electronics and don't have the "memory effect." Don't need to deplete the entire battery before charging it.
However, capacity does slowly diminish over time so they'll eventually need to be replaced. These batteries generally have specific unique form factors so batteries are generally model-specific.


Touchpad
A kind of mouse alternative for a laptop. Not as user-friendly as a mouse but it's an option.
May also have a pointing stick as well.


Laptop Frame
These are generally plastic, lightweight, and durable. Plastic is inexpensive and cost-effective.
They may also have metal cases as well but these are more difficult to repair if they break.


Speaker
Self-contained, portable audio. Not the highest audio quality due to their location and (lack of) size. Often L/R stereo and may even include a subwoofer


System board
Due to their limited size, the form factors and builds are usually proprietary as they need to be built to fit.
Repair usually means replacing the entire board so replacements aren't exactly simple.


CPU
Unlike a desktop, these are designed for mobility so they may be more difficult to cool.
They may try to use less power to offset this due to the heat and limited battery. As a result they're generally slower than their desktop counterparts.
CPUs generally have many more integrated features and aren't as upgradeable. However, in many cases they're still replaceable.

-------------------------------------------------
2. Laptop Displays
Most laptops are using LCDs.

LCD - Light shines through liquid crystals.
  LCD displays need a backlight. Fluorescent lamp to LCD display to your eyes.
  Some laptops have inverters. Convert DC into AC. If you look very closely, maybe with a flashlight, you can see the screen still rendering.
  If you can still see that data you may need to replace the inverter or the display entirely.

  Lightweight, and generally low power and inexpensive.
  However, black levels are poor, and if the backlight is dead, the whole screen would be unusable.

OLED - Organic Light Emitting Diode
  Organic compound emits light when receiving an electric current.
  These are thinner and lighter because they're more flexible and mobile. No glass needed.
  They also have no backlight because the compound gives off light.
  However, they're not quite ready for widespread use. The materials degrade over time, and burn-in is a real concern.
  They're also more costly than LCD and more power hungry.



LED-Backlit LCD display - Backlight is LEDs instead of fluorescent light. Use LEDs around the screen. An array of LEDs behind the screen. Latest laptops are LED-backlit.
CCFL - Cold Cathode Fluorescent Lamp. Generally older laptops use these. They take higher voltage and more power, and add thickness to the display. Not that common anymore.


Wifi Antennas
Multiple antennas, Wifi main, aux, and bluetooth. These wires generally wrap around the laptop screen.


Laptop webcam
These are built into the screen. Capture video and audio using built in camera and microphone.
Generally need specialize drivers and software.


Digitizer
Can use a pen-like device to input info instead of the traditional keyboard and mouse. Not as common but definitely an option for many laptops.
