1 Network Fundamentals

Think of a networking model as you think of a set of architectural plans for building a house.

Enterprise network - network created by a corporation or enterprise for the purpose of allowing its employees to communicate.
SOHO - Smaller networks when used for business purposes.

A cloud represents a part of a network whose details are not important to the purpose of the diagram.


The job of a network is to move data from one device to another.

-------------
TCP IP Model
Networking model - AKA networking architecture, or networking blueprint refers to a comprehensive set of documents.

TCP IP RFC 1122

Application layer - Provide services to the application software running on a computer.
Doesn't define the application itself, but defines services that the applications need.
Provides an interface between software running on a computer and the network itself.

-----------------
HTTP
Generally, protocols use headers as a place to put information used by that protocol.

--------------------------
TCP IP Transport layer
Two most commonly used transport layer protocols are TCP and UDP
TCP - Transmission Control protocol: Provides services to the application layer protocols
UDP - User Datagram Protocol

---------------------------
TCP Error Recovery Basics
TCP IP needs a mechanism to guarantee delivery of data across a network.
TCP header shows a sequence number (SEQ) with each message. If not in sequence, this prompts TCP to resend data.

-------------------------------------------
Same-Layer and Adjacent-layer interactions

Adjacent-layer interactions - General topic of how on one computer, two adjacent layers in a networking architecture model work together, with the low layer providing services to the higher layer.
ex.; HTTP may want error recovery, and the lower layer TCP performs this service of error recovery. Lower layer provides a service to the layer above it.

Same-layer interactions - When a particular layer on one computer wants to communicate with the same layer on another computer. Use headers to hold the info that they want to communicate.

---------------------------
TCP IP Network Layer

Network layer contains only one major protocol, the internet protocol, IP.
The name TCP IP is simply the names of the two most common protocols, TCP and IP.

IP Protocol provides addressing and routing services.
IP defines that each host should have a different IP address. Each host needs a unique address so that it can be identified in the network.
Also defines how to group addresses together, like a ZIP code.

-----------------------------
IP Routing Basics
TCP IP using the IP protocol provides a service of forwarding IP packets from one device to another.
Any device with an IP address can connect to the TCP IP network and send packets.
IP routing - process of forwarding IP packets

-----------------------------
TCP IP Link layer
Link refers to physical connection between two devices and the protocols used to control those links.

Frame - data link header and trailer plus data encapsulated between them.
Headers exist at the beginning of a message, trailers at the end.

Link layer includes a large amount of protocols and standards including ethernet, LAN standards.
Link layer includes WAN standards as well which differ significantly compared to LAN.


TCP Link layer includes two distinct functions: functions related to physical transmission of data, plus protocols and rules that control the use of the physical media.
TCP IP model splits out link layer into two layers (data link and physical) to match this logic.

-----------------------
Modern TCP IP Model:
  application
  Transport
  Network
  Data Link - Encapsulation, addressing
  Physical - bit transmission

---------------------------------
Data Encapsulation Terminology
Encapsulation - refers to the process of putting headers around some data.

Process by which a TCP IP host sends data can be viewed as a five-step process. First four relate to encapsulation and the last step is the actual tansmission of the data by the host.

Step 1.
  Create and encapsulate application data with any required application layer Headers.
  ex.; HTTP OK message can be returned in an HTTP header

Step 2.
  Encapsulate the data supplied by application layer inside a transport layer header.
  Typically TCP or UDP header is used.

Step 3.
  Encapsulate the data supplied by the transport layer inside a network layer header.

Step 4.
  Encapsulate data supplied by network layer inside a data link layer header and trailer.

Step 5.
  Transmit the bits

------------------------
Names of TCP IP Messages

Segment - transport layer Datagram
Packet - Network layer Datagram
frame - link layer datagram



-------------------------------
OSI Networking Model

Although no longer used as a networking model, many of the terms from OSI still used.
Has seven layers. Used as a standard of comparison to other networking models.

OSI Model:
  Application - provides an interface from application to network by supplying a protocol with actions meaningful to the app.
  Presentation - Negotiates data formats, like ASCII or JPEG
  Session - Provides methods to group multiple bidirectional messages into a workflow for easier management and easier backout of work
  Transport - Like TCP IP transport layer
  Network - Like TCP IP Network layer
  Data Link - "
  Physical - Defines physical characteristics of the transmission medium, including pins and connectors.

Networking documents often describe TCP IP protocols and standards by referencing OSI layers both by layer number and name.
Generally maps to the same thing as TCP IP model.

Common Protocols used in OSI
  Application, Presentation, session - Telnet, HTTP, FTP, SMTP, POP3, VOIP, SNMP.
    Devices - Hosts, firewalls
  Transport - TCP, UDP
    Devices - Hosts, firewalls
  Network - IP
    Devices - Router
  Data link - Ethernet (IEEE 802.3), HDLC
    Devices - LAN switch, WAP, cable modem, etc.
  Physical - RJ-45, Ethernet (IEEE 802.3)
    Devices - LAN Hub, LAN repeater, cables

-----------------------------
OSI Encapsulation Terminology
OSI also asks for service from the next lowest layer

PDU - Protocol datagram Unit. Generic term to refer to frame, packet, or segment.
  ex.; L3PDU - Layer 3 PDU
