Typical SOHO LANs

Ethernet - general reference to any cable that conforms to any of several Ethernet standards, ie.; Ethernet cables
Defines LAN technology only. Ethernet is an entire family of standards

Wireless LANs - Defined via IEEE 802.11, use radio waves to send the bits from one node to the next.

WAP - AP acts somewhat like an Ethernet switch, all wLAN nodes connect with ethernet switch by sending/receiving data with it.
Only needs the single Ethernet link to connect to the Ethernet LAN.


------------------------------
Typical Enterprise LANs

Typically in a large environment, each per-floor switch connects to a large distribution switch.


---------------------------------
Variety of Ethernet Physical Layer Standards

UTP is cheaper than fiber but fiber lets you perform longer cable runs between nodes

Ethernet standards typically named via 802.3 followed by some suffix of letters depending on standard.
Suffix of T is typically UTP, and fiber suffix is typically an X


----------------------------------------------------------------------
Consistent Behavior over All Links Using the Ethernet Data Link Layer

Ethernet includes many physical layer standards, but it acts like a single LAN technology because it uses the same data link layer standard over all of those physical links

Ethernet frame - Data-link layer protocol sends these types of datagrams from source to destination nodes.
From a data-link perspective, nodes build and forward frames.

Ethernet LAN - Combination of user devices, LAN switches, and different kinds of cabling.

Three most common Ethernet standards:
  10BASE-T - Ethernet
  100BASE-T - Fast Ethernet (FE)
  1000BASE-T - Gigabit Ethernet (GE)


-------------------------------------------------
Transmitting Data Using Twisted Pairs

Electrical circuits require complete loops, so two nodes using circuitry connect the wires in one pair to complete a loop. Allows electricity to flow

Encoding scheme - similar to two people talking in the same language.
Sender changes electrical signal changes over time and receiving node interprets changes using same rules as transmitter as either 0s or 1s.

Twisting wire pairs together help cancel out most EMI, so most copper wires in networking use twisted pairs.


---------------------------------------
Breaking Down a UTP Ethernet Link

Ethernet Link - any physical cable between two Ethernet Nodes.

10BASE-T and 100BASE-T require two pairs of wires, 1000BASE-T requires four wire pairs.

Pin position - physical location in which wires can be inserted into. ex.; RJ45 has eight locations for eight pins.

Cisco switches include some physical ports where the transceiver portion can be changed later.


------------------------------------------------
UTP Cabling pinouts for 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T

Ethernet NIC transmitters use the pair connected to pins 1 and 2. NIC receivers use a pair of wires at pin positions 3 and 6.
LAN switches do the opposite. They receive at pins 1 and 2 and transmit with wire pair at 3 and 6.

PC NIC communicates with a switch via a straight-through cable pinout.

pinout - wiring of which color wire is placed in each of the eight numbered pin positions in RJ45.

Ethernet straight-through cable - connects the wire at pin 1 on one end to pin one at the other end, pin 2 needs to connect to pin 2 at the other end, and so on.


Crossover cable - pinout crosses the pair at the transmit pins on each device to receive pins on the opposite device.
Used to avoid transmit conflict when connecting two devices.


--------------------------------------------
Choosing the Right Cable Pinout

Key is to know whether devices act like a PC NIC, transmitting at pins 1 and 2, or like a switch transmitting at 3 and 6.

Apply this logic to know which cable to use:
  Crossover cable - If endpoints transmit on the same pin pair
  Straight-through cable: if endpoints transmit on different pin pairs.

Auto-mdix - Feature on Cisco switches that notices when the wrong cable is used and automatically changes its logic to make it work.

Devices that transmit on Pins 1,2:
  PC NICs
  Routers
  WAP

Devices that transmit on pins 3,6:
  Hubs
  Switches


-------------------------------------
UTP Cabling Pinouts for 1000BASE-T

Gigabit Ethernet crossover cable - crosses over the 1,2 and 3,6 wire pairs like other Ethernet standards, and the pairs at 4,5 and 7,8.


-----------------------------------
Ethernet Data-Link Protocols

Core parts of data-link standard date back to original Ethernet standards.
Ethernet also defines a few alternate formats for header


Format of a commonly used Ethernet frame in order of header <-> trailer
  --Header--
  Preamble: 7 bytes - Synchronization
  SDF: 1 byte - Start Frame Delimiter, signifies that the next byte begins MAC address
  Destination MAC: 6 bytes - Identifies intended recipiend of this frame
  Source MAC: 6 Bytes - Identifies sender of this frame
  Type: 2 bytes - Defines the type of protocol listed inside the frame, most likely IPv4 or 6 today.
  --Header--
  Data and pad: 46 - 1500 bytes - Holds data from a higher layer, typically L3PDU. Sender adds padding to meet minimum 46 byte requirement (defined by IEEE 802.3)
  --Trailer--
  FCS: 4 bytes - Frame Check Sequence, provides method for receiving NIC to determine whether frame experienced transmission errors.
  --Trailer--


---------------------------------------
Ethernet Addressing

Source and destination Ethernet address fields play a huge role in how Ethernet LANs work.

Sending node puts its own address in the source field address, and the intended Ethernet destination device's address in the destination address field.

MAC address, AKA ethernet address. 6-byte long.
Before a manufacturer can build Ethernet products, it must ask the IEEE to assign the manufacturer a universally unique 3-byte code, called the OUI
  OUI - Organizationally unique identifier

Last 3 bytes in MAC are unique for that OUI, never used before, per IEEE standards

Unicast - formal way to refer to the fact that the address represents one interface to the Ethernet LAN.

Group addresses - identifier more than one LAN interface card. IEEE defines two types:
  Broadcast address - Frames delivered to all devices on the Ethernet LAN. Value = FFFF.FFFF.FFFF

  Multicast address - Frames will be copied and forwarded to a subset of devices on the LAN that volunteers to receive frames sent to specific multicast address

LAN addressing terms:
  MAC - Media Access Control. 802.3 defines the MAC sublayer of IEEE Ethernet
  Ethernet address, LAN address - These terms describe the 6-byte address of the LAN interface card.
  Burned-in address 6-byte address assigned by the vendor making the card

  Unicast address - Term for MAC address that represents a single LAN interface
  Broadcast address - Address that means "all devices that reside on this LAN right now."
  Multicast address - On Ethernet, implies some subset of all devices currently on the Ethernet LAN


-------------------------------------------------------------
Identifying Network Layer Protocols with Ethernet Type Field

EtherType - field that sits in the Ethernet data link layer header, but purpose is to directly help network processing on routers and hosts.
Identifies the type of network layer packet that sits inside the frame. Different known values (defined by IEEE) define what type of L3 packet the data is.

Ethernet FCS - Frame Check Sequence: only field in Ethernet trailer. Gives the receiving ode a way to compare results to the sender and discover whether there were errors in the frame.
Sender applies a complex math formula to frame before sending it, receiver applies same formula to compare results. If results are same, frame is good, if not, frame is bad.

Ethernet defines bad frames should be discarded, but doesn't attempt to recover.


-----------------------------------------------------
Sending Ethernet Frames with Switches and Hubs

Modern switches allow use of full-duplex logic, which is much faster and simpler than half-duplex that hubs use.


Half duplex - Device must wait to send if it's currently receiving a frame, aka can't send and receive at the same time.

Full duplex - Device doesn't have to wait before sending, can receive and send at the same time.

Hubs have no concept of frames, addresses, etc. Just a repeater

Switches are L2 devices, look at data-link header and trailer.

CSMA/CD - Collision detection algorithm for half-duplex logic.
  1. Device with frame to send listens till Ethernet isn't busy.
  2. When not busy, sender sends frame
  3. Sender listens while sending  to discover whether collision occurs.
    If one occurs:
    a. All sending nodes send a jamming signal to tell all nodes that a collision happened.
    b. Independently choose a random time to wait before trying again to avoid bad timing.
    c. Start back at step 1.

  All links between PCs and switches, and between switches use full duplexes. Any link connected to a hub should use half.
  Hubs themselves don't use half-duplex logic, just repeat signal out to all ports.
